Hello, everyone, my name is David
Khourshid, and I'm really excited to be
doing another workshop on state
machines with XState in JavaScript.
And we're gonna be discussing a lot
more than version one of the workshop.
So if you've taken version one, and
you've taken the React's versions of
the workshop, then we're going
to be building on top of that.
Still working in vanilla JavaScript, but
we're going to be going
over a lot of things today.
We're gonna be going
over software modeling,
when to use state machines and
when to use state charts,
all the fundamental parts of
state machines and state charts.
They're going to be useful in
your everyday applications.
And we're also gonna be talking
a lot about the actor model and
how you could use actors to represent the
different parts of your application that
are communicating with each other.
So like I said,
my name is David Khourshid,
I work at Stately,
which is a company that I founded.
And we're creating a lot of tools for
visualizing application logic,
whether it's with state machines, or
state charts, or other types of diagrams.
So a lot of what we do today is
actually going to be represented in
the tools that we're building at Stately.
I'm also on Twitter @DavidKPiano,
so please feel free to follow me,
reach out to me, DM me, whatever you want.
So before we get started,
I wanna talk about how this
workshop is going to be structured.
So you should have received the link
to the GitHub repo, it's at
https://github.com/davidkpiano/frontend-m-
asters-xstate-v2.
The previous workshop is
Frontend Masters XState Workshop.
So if you do wanna go back and review
that, then a lot of the material will
be similar, but there's also a lot
of new things in this workshop.
Now, this assumes that you have Node
installed because this is a JavaScript
application.
And we're going to be using Vite,
it's a newer tool just for
bundling applications and making them run,
and I found that very useful.
This application is a vanilla JavaScript
app, we're not using any frameworks.
And this is important because
we want to keep things simple.
And also we want you to learn skills that
you could apply to any framework that
you're using with XState,
whether it's React, Vue, Svelte, Angular,
any of those frameworks, or
even no framework at all,
if you're applying XState
in different contexts.
So of course, make sure that you have
Node installed and NPM installed as well.
To get started,
you are going to run npm install,
or if you're using Yarn, you could run
yarn install as well, or just yarn.
And then you're going to run npm run dev.
This is going to start the web
server at localhost port 3000.
And so when you do that, and
I'll do that real quick right now.
So you just go to, all right, we're in
there, so you're going to run yarn or
npm install.
I've already done that, so
I'm just gonna run yarn dev.
And so this is going to run
the site at localhost 3000.
So if we go to localhost 3000,
You're going to see the main page here.
Now, let me show you in
the repo where this lives.
If you git clone the repo and
bring it down to your local system,
you're going to see in VS Code,
you're gonna see a whole bunch of folders.
Each of these folders contains files for
the exercises that we're
going to be doing, but
the main file that you see over here
lives right here in the main repo.
So this is the index.html page, and
you can use this as a scratch pad.
And so I really encourage you to do so.
We're going to be using this a lot for
just going over the various concepts in
XState and also playing around with some
code before we jump into the exercises.
So just to test that everything's working,
if you console.log a nice Hello world!,
then you should be able to see it
right in the console over there.
And that's how you know
that things are working.
Vite is also really good at doing
fast refresh, so keep that in mind.
When you make changes to the files,
you don't have to manually reload,
you could just see it live
in the actual window.
Now, what we're actually building
today is a real world app.
We're building a media player.
And so if you go to the last exercise,
which is 10 Testing,
you're going to see this
media player in action.
Now, this is just one of
your typical media players.
It doesn't actually connect to media
because we're not trying to play audio
over here.
But it's a good starting point for if you
do want to create a media player that does
play media, either through the audio, the
Web Audio API, or some other mechanism,
then you could use this exact same app
logic that we create in XState to do so.
This app has a number
of different functions.
You could like or unlike a song,
dislike it, you could play or pause,
of course, you could skip forward, and
you can mute and unmute the microphone.
This is also an app that's
meant to be incomplete,
which means it is really
what you make of it.
Because while we do have certain
functionality that we're going to
be building here, the functionality
that you decide to add is
something that can be
added on after the fact.
So if you wanted to add advanced
audio controls like changing
the microphone volume, or
if you want to do things like go back and
go forward, or maybe display a playlist.
This app is meant for
you to really experiment and
see all the different things that
you could add, and also realize how
easy it is to add once you have the app
logic modelled as a state machine.
So really, this is something that is for
you to play around with and
is not meant to be 100% complete.
Rather, each of the exercises are meant
to teach different parts of XState, and
state machines, and state charts,
and parts of the actor model.
And like I said, it's up to you
to build on top of those things.